vault/books.the-great-rat-race-escape.md, before:

---
id: 00B_YQB7jpXS0RDLZH-D3
title: The Great Rat Race Escape
desc: ''
updated: 1625990349642
created: 1625928722856
---

# The Great Rat Race Escape

## 1/5/10 Strategy

what do you nered to do in the next 30 days tog et started toward your 1 year vision?

Where to do you need to be in 1 year to have the groundwork for your 5 years vision?

Where to do you need to be in 5 years to be HALFWAY to your 10 years vision?

What is your vision for where you are in 10 years, personally, professionally and financially?

## Money systems?

Money system (stocks, real estate etc.) only 1 part of my Systems
Money system NOT to create wealth but to maintain and grows/keep up to value

## Business system
To make money;
it needs specialized-unit and helps to give it the the right audience

- You need to skew values on the specialized-unit
Skew first:
1. primary attributes. the product itself: UI, prices, colors, raw materials, 
2. secondary attributes. Presentation, distribution, delivery (marketing stuff ) your website features...

> buy decision count many attributes; more your skewed values, more easy to sell


## Profit locus Strategy, the door the the rat escape

Not to wage-locus or salary-locus
ULL = ~~Uncontrollable Limited Leverage~~

### Specialize-unit strategy

1. first order: specialized-unit disconnected by time and possibly sold in large quantities
2. second order: from specialized skill, to make more money but limited by time (ex. making a website)

==The specialized unit should be difficult to create and easy to replicate==

## construct a leverage vehicle
1 u effort = 5 units of pay

---

Scientist - Team Producer

GAP gross annual production
GAC gross annual consumption
ANE annual net existence = are you a producer or a cunsumer? GAP - GAC
NW net worth =  total ANEs or Total (Assets -liabilities)
R&D research and development

ANE results
- positive: you're a scientist
- negative: you're a rat

---


## Skew strategy

1 negative attribute can destroy 10 positives

## Principles

Specialize: go from specialized skills to specialize units
Imperfection: everything that can be improved is a business opportunity
Pond: if you want to catch more fish, you'll need to put yourself in a bigger body of water.
The Drake Equation: business plan are speculation; CENTS, TAM, skews, medium, replication, vision, and exit ideas suffice for a sufficient business plan
Desert of desertion: expectation that your business will be difficult, and motivation will wane, to the point of quitting
Baseball principle: one swing doesn't make a season;entrepreneurial career should be segregated into a at-bats, games, and seasons.
Probability Hacking: choices hack probabilities ( and better choices more, ence luck! )

## Ideas and Execution
All ideas sucks until brought to life by execution

## TUM vs TAM
total unreachable market vs Total addressable market
Chains, franchises, distribution, units, and licenses can transform TUm into TAM

## the 3A strategy - Applying the scientific method via an iterative process

Before Pivot:
Act
Assess
Adjust 



---

# Ideas
~~Investing money~~
1 .Time investing 101 course: 
Time investing = investing in time not trading time for money
your gain: free-time, money from free time activities
Free yourself from time...
 

2. oil painting brushes-cover:
recycled plastic
long time no dry
quick 

3. auto cleaning teca for LEGO collection etc.
ex. [ecometa](https://www.ecometa.store/en/)

4.  Correlator| PatternFinder | TraderIdeas

5. Garbage path to wealth: only investing in yourself
    - investing in yourself
    - bonds
    - index funds or
    - stocks 15/20 in diverse sectors
    - options
    - ~~crypto~~
    - real estate
    - open a business

6. high density closed-cell polyethylene foam for crash bouldering pad

Commit message:

DB SQL + notes raterace book

vault/books.the-great-rat-race-escape.md, after:

---
id: 00B_YQB7jpXS0RDLZH-D3
title: The Great Rat Race Escape
desc: ''
updated: 1625990349642
created: 1625928722856
---

# The Great Rat Race Escape

## 1/5/10 Strategy

what do you nered to do in the next 30 days tog et started toward your 1 year vision?

Where to do you need to be in 1 year to have the groundwork for your 5 years vision?

Where to do you need to be in 5 years to be HALFWAY to your 10 years vision?

What is your vision for where you are in 10 years, personally, professionally and financially?

## Money systems?

Money system (stocks, real estate etc.) only 1 part of my Systems
Money system NOT to create wealth but to maintain and grows/keep up to value

## Business system
To make money;
it needs specialized-unit and helps to give it the the right audience

- You need to skew values on the specialized-unit
Skew first:
1. primary attributes. the product itself: UI, prices, colors, raw materials, 
2. secondary attributes. Presentation, distribution, delivery (marketing stuff ) your website features...

> buy decision count many attributes; more your skewed values, more easy to sell


## Profit locus Strategy, the door the the rat escape

Not to wage-locus or salary-locus
ULL = ~~Uncontrollable Limited Leverage~~

### Specialize-unit strategy

1. first order: specialized-unit disconnected by time and possibly sold in large quantities
2. second order: from specialized skill, to make more money but limited by time (ex. making a website)

==The specialized unit should be difficult to create and easy to replicate==

## construct a leverage vehicle
1 u effort = 5 units of pay

---

Scientist - Team Producer

GAP gross annual production
GAC gross annual consumption
ANE annual net existence = are you a producer or a cunsumer? GAP - GAC
NW net worth =  total ANEs or Total (Assets -liabilities)
R&D research and development

ANE results
- positive: you're a scientist
- negative: you're a rat

---


## Skew strategy

1 negative attribute can destroy 10 positives

## Principles

Specialize: go from specialized skills to specialize units
Imperfection: everything that can be improved is a business opportunity
Pond: if you want to catch more fish, you'll need to put yourself in a bigger body of water.
The Drake Equation: business plan are speculation; CENTS, TAM, skews, medium, replication, vision, and exit ideas suffice for a sufficient business plan
Desert of desertion: expectation that your business will be difficult, and motivation will wane, to the point of quitting
Baseball principle: one swing doesn't make a season;entrepreneurial career should be segregated into a at-bats, games, and seasons.
Probability Hacking: choices hack probabilities ( and better choices more, ence luck! )
Optimum experience Strategy: select a business that optimizes the customer experience
The engagement Strategy: if you want an endless book full of ideas waiting to be exploited, start engaging the world; you can't spot opportunity in a bubble!
Cinderella Principle
Critical path strategy: without a defined problem, also the solution remain undefined; put yourself in the face of a problem and you won't get lost.
The right book strategy: read the book that you need to read to solve the next problem in your 3A cycle




## Ideas and Execution
All ideas sucks until brought to life by execution

## TUM vs TAM
total unreachable market vs Total addressable market
Chains, franchises, distribution, units, and licenses can transform TUm into TAM

## the 3A strategy - Applying the scientific method via an iterative process

Before Pivot:
Act
Assess
Adjust 



---

# Ideas
~~Investing money~~
1 .Time investing 101 course: 
Time investing = investing in time not trading time for money
your gain: free-time, money from free time activities
Free yourself from time...
 

2. oil painting brushes-cover:
recycled plastic
long time no dry
quick 

3. auto cleaning teca for LEGO collection etc.
ex. [ecometa](https://www.ecometa.store/en/)

4.  Correlates| PatternFinder | TraderIdeas

5. Garbage path to wealth: only investing in yourself
    - investing in yourself
    - bonds
    - index funds or
    - stocks 15/20 in diverse sectors
    - options
    - ~~crypto~~
    - real estate
    - open a business

6. high density closed-cell polyethylene foam for crash bouldering pad
