vault/health.body-optimization.md, before:

---
id: c6169ec7-2983-4fc4-9931-35b3e2a154da
title: Body Optimization
desc: ''
updated: 1616792731204
created: 1616067166506
---

references:
examine.com

## Andrew Huberman Series on YouTube

2021-03-22 18:50
### How Your Nervous System Works & Changes

- nervous system: brain + spinal chord
- memory: pattern of electricity and neurons
- attention can be under control when we're rested
- neuron release chemicals with profound effects on our emotional state (*neuro modulators such as dopamine, seratonine, acetylcholine, epinefrine) they bias which neurons are going to be active
- thoughts: allow reach into the past and anticipate the future that allow us engsge in things that are not only for the moment...
- deliberate practice consist of 3 things: duration of the event, path and outcome
- impulsivity is a lack of top-down control, of top-down processing that develop as well with age sometime not till 20 or more y.o.(it take down the fore brain),like alcohol
- when you're shaking because you're angry is your lymbic system, the frontal cortex is in conflict with it.
- neuroplasticity(ability to change the nervous system): you wanna know how to shape your behaviour
- neuroplasticity:
    - positive (adaptive) and self directed: how can I engage neuroplasticity?
    the key to answer is understanding how awake or asleepy we are.
    We can decide we can change our brain and the brain can change itself
    Neuroplasticity is more difficult in adults that's why kids can learn more language without an accent.
    In adults, neuroplasticity is regulated by gatekeepers: *neuromodulators (see above)
    In adults appened easier with traumatic events 'cause of epinefrine and acetylcholine and it does that like an highlighter:
    - epinefrine -> alertness and acetylcholine (in foods as eggs, meat and fish,dairy, Chocolate, peanut butter, brussels sprouts and broccoli as choline) -> marking the neurons active during this state of alertness and this process streghten the synapsis in the brain and let them more active in the future even without thinking too much
    - HOW TO LEARN (sience): how much time you can continually focus on what you want to learn and agitation/strain as well (epinefrine release) to trigger neuroplasticity but the re-wiring happens during inactivity, such as sleep and sleep deep rest. study very hard and very intense and immediately after 20' deep rest/sleep, accellerate neuroplasticity
    - SLEEP and FOCUS ex. if the people are learning a brain or motor skill with a tone palying in the background and that 'bell'/tone is playing during deep sleep that learning is much faster (it cuePs the nervous system) 
    - - Mastering the Autonomic Nervous System: role of autonomic nervous system in [ultradian](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ultradian_rhythm) rhythms and they continue during the day so the first 10' awake during let's say I'm trying to learn they'll be challanging and hard then I'll enter into the flow so I can go deep into learning then probably last 10' my attention level will go down again (time for a break!)
    - when during the day you get anxious ask yourself when are you most focused? when are you least anxious? when you feel least motivated? discover when your sensation, perception etc. want to be engaged and not, you'll develop the ability to choose when to do one thing or the other.
    

2021-03-24 19:10
### Master Your Sleep & Be More Alert When Awake
- get consistency in sleep, get asleep better, sleep better, wake feeling better
- 2 things: 
    - Adenosine building up (high): create a sleep hunger, more you're awake more it increase
    caffeine 'in general' block the adenosine receptors but you need to explore your range
    - circadian force (clock in our brain) regulate when we want to be awake or sleep
- we wake-up because cortisol from adrenal glands and adrenaline and (epinefrine from your brain) getting high. This pulse happen early in the day and it's influenced by light.
    - at the same time the melatonine get signal for sleepiness from the pineal gland: as an adult is release only at night based on your circadian but dont get external melatonine, specially for kids since it suppress onset puberty via blocking other hormons since it's getting activate.
- get sunlight (energy) into your eyes (nervous cells) in the morning at sunrise or close to it. No through windows! it need to be direct! too late can cause anxiety disorder and depression and blood pressure. so Cortisol early in the day and via sunlight! if artificial you need a lot of blue and yellow light arrive in your retina in the morning.
- to your body to know when is day or evening go outside al sunrise (early sunlight) and late afternoon at sunset (c.ca); light information set the circadian clock via eyes only.
- bad effect of light: (because of artificial light): basically a lot of light, blue light early in the day, day and light after say 8pm in the evening
- location of the lights in the evening should be low in the room and better yellow, red SO NO STRONG LIGHTS BETWEEN 11PM AND 4AM.
- ==NSDR== practice to getting better at sleep NON SLEEP DEEP REST: 
    - yoganidra: 20' at the time: [first](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M0u9GST_j3s&t=48s) and [second](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FroVfmOtaps)
- [clinic hypnosis to re-wire sleep](https://reverihealth.com/)
- what affect circadian time behavior? all drugs/compounds: what is safer?
    - magnesium threonate -> GABA 300/440 gr, 30/60' before sleep
    - theanine -> 100/200 gr, 30/60' before sleep
    - apigenin <- from c hamomile (but increase estrogens)
    - check examine.com for more info



2021-03-19 19:34
### How Foods and Nutrients Control Our Moods 

- nerve vague (transcranial nerve) and stimulation of relaxment
- gut has sensors that sense... like sugar!, aka the gut feeling!
- ex if I put sugar into a salty food...my body will sense it and without know that I'll crave for more of that food (just because it has sugar!)
- rewards/predictions error and dopamine; amino acids in the gut detect which amino acids and L-tyrosine...that make dopamine. 
L-tyrosine Increase mood but as well brain fog. 
seratonine ...
- [mucuna pruriens](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3942911/) for dopamine, sperm motility etc...
- L-carnitine increase pregnancy, POS (sindrome ovaio policistico), male fertility, decrease depression, autism
- decrease L-carnitine
- Bioma: pro and pre-biotics -> Healthy gut micro biom -> fermented foods
- I want to promote a micro biom that is good for me, based on my habits and I've been raise (in terms of food) that influence the nervous system
- ...Diets Agenda, every one works and still it depends...fermented foods always support your micro biom

2021-03-18 11:33
### Using Science to Optimize Sleep, Learning & Metabolism

- red lights for a few minutes in the morning to optimize cell mythocondria via effect on photoreceptors in back of the retina... help repare them!
- circadian clock look for a lot of light in the morning to increase alertness
- watch sun light in the evening
- longer days (summer) melatonin less
- performance are optimize and injury reduced, when? (even in terms of STUDYING!)
    - 30' after waking up, 3 hrs after waking (rise of the body temperature), and 11 hrs after waking. basically when the temperature tend to peak
    - this means if I wake up at 7 am: 7:30, 10 am, 18:30
    - cycle learning is 90': start - focus - deep focus - tired
    - 20' naps/light non sleep/deep rest close after last read sentence/study
    it has been proven to accelerate learning to a significant degree, in terms of amount of info and retention of info (drug free boost)
- hypnosis can help... research more in AH video
- Nootropics: Magnesium-L-Threonate to get asleep, Modafinil...
- temperature in sleep:
    - ref. [Joseph_Takahashi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_Takahashi) and [Abstract](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3756146/)
    - how to use cold to enhance energy/moods:
        - cold shower approach, to raise stress treshold, and try to resist shivering (a natural response to warm you up); try to relax during it... 4 sec technique
        - for lose fat (thermogenesis) -> succinate in blood -> increase fat brown, rich in mitochondria and help ti generate energy: DONT resist the shivering!

> fasting(few meat and nuts)/tyrosine -> epinephrine/norepinephrine/dopamine = pro activity
carbo/tryptophan -> serotonine = pro sleep
increase temperature extend the day...

#### Checklist with the purpose to identify variables that are influencing your life day to day - Self experimentation

- [ ] wakeup time
- [ ] time :sunny: ?
- [ ] time exercises? 
- [ ] aerobic
- [ ] anaerobic 
- [ ] chill? 
- [ ] hot? 
- [ ] non sleep/deep rest protocol/hypnosis
- [ ] meals?

Commit message:

Update A Huberman podcast on stress

vault/health.body-optimization.md, after:

---
id: c6169ec7-2983-4fc4-9931-35b3e2a154da
title: Body Optimization
desc: ''
updated: 1617219111649
created: 1616067166506
---

references:
examine.com

## Andrew Huberman Series on YouTube

2021-03-22 18:50
### How Your Nervous System Works & Changes

- nervous system: brain + spinal chord
- memory: pattern of electricity and neurons
- attention can be under control when we're rested
- neuron release chemicals with profound effects on our emotional state (*neuro modulators such as dopamine, seratonine, acetylcholine, epinefrine) they bias which neurons are going to be active
- thoughts: allow reach into the past and anticipate the future that allow us engsge in things that are not only for the moment...
- deliberate practice consist of 3 things: duration of the event, path and outcome
- impulsivity is a lack of top-down control, of top-down processing that develop as well with age sometime not till 20 or more y.o.(it take down the fore brain),like alcohol
- when you're shaking because you're angry is your lymbic system, the frontal cortex is in conflict with it.
- neuroplasticity(ability to change the nervous system): you wanna know how to shape your behaviour
- neuroplasticity:
    - positive (adaptive) and self directed: how can I engage neuroplasticity?
    the key to answer is understanding how awake or asleepy we are.
    We can decide we can change our brain and the brain can change itself
    Neuroplasticity is more difficult in adults that's why kids can learn more language without an accent.
    In adults, neuroplasticity is regulated by gatekeepers: *neuromodulators (see above)
    In adults appened easier with traumatic events 'cause of epinefrine and acetylcholine and it does that like an highlighter:
    - epinefrine -> alertness and acetylcholine (in foods as eggs, meat and fish,dairy, Chocolate, peanut butter, brussels sprouts and broccoli as choline) -> marking the neurons active during this state of alertness and this process streghten the synapsis in the brain and let them more active in the future even without thinking too much
    - HOW TO LEARN (sience): how much time you can continually focus on what you want to learn and agitation/strain as well (epinefrine release) to trigger neuroplasticity but the re-wiring happens during inactivity, such as sleep and sleep deep rest. study very hard and very intense and immediately after 20' deep rest/sleep, accellerate neuroplasticity
    - SLEEP and FOCUS ex. if the people are learning a brain or motor skill with a tone palying in the background and that 'bell'/tone is playing during deep sleep that learning is much faster (it cuePs the nervous system) 
    - - Mastering the Autonomic Nervous System: role of autonomic nervous system in [ultradian](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ultradian_rhythm) rhythms and they continue during the day so the first 10' awake during let's say I'm trying to learn they'll be challanging and hard then I'll enter into the flow so I can go deep into learning then probably last 10' my attention level will go down again (time for a break!)
    - when during the day you get anxious ask yourself when are you most focused? when are you least anxious? when you feel least motivated? discover when your sensation, perception etc. want to be engaged and not, you'll develop the ability to choose when to do one thing or the other.
    

2021-03-24 19:10
### Master Your Sleep & Be More Alert When Awake
- get consistency in sleep, get asleep better, sleep better, wake feeling better
- 2 things: 
    - Adenosine building up (high): create a sleep hunger, more you're awake more it increase
    caffeine 'in general' block the adenosine receptors but you need to explore your range
    - circadian force (clock in our brain) regulate when we want to be awake or sleep
- we wake-up because cortisol from adrenal glands and adrenaline and (epinefrine from your brain) getting high. This pulse happen early in the day and it's influenced by light.
    - at the same time the melatonine get signal for sleepiness from the pineal gland: as an adult is release only at night based on your circadian but dont get external melatonine, specially for kids since it suppress onset puberty via blocking other hormons since it's getting activate.
- get sunlight (energy) into your eyes (nervous cells) in the morning at sunrise or close to it. No through windows! it need to be direct! too late can cause anxiety disorder and depression and blood pressure. so Cortisol early in the day and via sunlight! if artificial you need a lot of blue and yellow light arrive in your retina in the morning.
- to your body to know when is day or evening go outside al sunrise (early sunlight) and late afternoon at sunset (c.ca); light information set the circadian clock via eyes only.
- bad effect of light: (because of artificial light): basically a lot of light, blue light early in the day, day and light after say 8pm in the evening
- location of the lights in the evening should be low in the room and better yellow, red SO NO STRONG LIGHTS BETWEEN 11PM AND 4AM.
- ==NSDR== practice to getting better at sleep NON SLEEP DEEP REST: 
    - yoganidra: 20' at the time: [first](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M0u9GST_j3s&t=48s) and [second](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FroVfmOtaps)
- [clinic hypnosis to re-wire sleep](https://reverihealth.com/)
- what affect circadian time behavior? all drugs/compounds: what is safer?
    - magnesium threonate -> GABA 300/440 gr, 30/60' before sleep
    - theanine -> 100/200 gr, 30/60' before sleep
    - apigenin <- from c hamomile (but increase estrogens)
    - check examine.com for more info



2021-03-19 19:34
### How Foods and Nutrients Control Our Moods 

- nerve vague (transcranial nerve) and stimulation of relaxment
- gut has sensors that sense... like sugar!, aka the gut feeling!
- ex if I put sugar into a salty food...my body will sense it and without know that I'll crave for more of that food (just because it has sugar!)
- rewards/predictions error and dopamine; amino acids in the gut detect which amino acids and L-tyrosine...that make dopamine. 
L-tyrosine Increase mood but as well brain fog. 
seratonine ...
- [mucuna pruriens](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3942911/) for dopamine, sperm motility etc...
- L-carnitine increase pregnancy, POS (sindrome ovaio policistico), male fertility, decrease depression, autism
- decrease L-carnitine
- Bioma: pro and pre-biotics -> Healthy gut micro biom -> fermented foods
- I want to promote a micro biom that is good for me, based on my habits and I've been raise (in terms of food) that influence the nervous system
- ...Diets Agenda, every one works and still it depends...fermented foods always support your micro biom

2021-03-18 11:33
### Using Science to Optimize Sleep, Learning & Metabolism

- red lights for a few minutes in the morning to optimize cell mythocondria via effect on photoreceptors in back of the retina... help repare them!
- circadian clock look for a lot of light in the morning to increase alertness
- watch sun light in the evening
- longer days (summer) melatonin less
- performance are optimize and injury reduced, when? (even in terms of STUDYING!)
    - 30' after waking up, 3 hrs after waking (rise of the body temperature), and 11 hrs after waking. basically when the temperature tend to peak
    - this means if I wake up at 7 am: 7:30, 10 am, 18:30
    - cycle learning is 90': start - focus - deep focus - tired
    - 20' naps/light non sleep/deep rest close after last read sentence/study
    it has been proven to accelerate learning to a significant degree, in terms of amount of info and retention of info (drug free boost)
- hypnosis can help... research more in AH video
- Nootropics: Magnesium-L-Threonate to get asleep, Modafinil...
- temperature in sleep:
    - ref. [Joseph_Takahashi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_Takahashi) and [Abstract](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3756146/)
    - how to use cold to enhance energy/moods:
        - cold shower approach, to raise stress treshold, and try to resist shivering (a natural response to warm you up); try to relax during it... 4 sec technique
        - for lose fat (thermogenesis) -> succinate in blood -> increase fat brown, rich in mitochondria and help ti generate energy: DONT resist the shivering!

> fasting(few meat and nuts)/tyrosine -> epinephrine/norepinephrine/dopamine = pro activity
carbo/tryptophan -> serotonine = pro sleep
increase temperature extend the day...

#### Checklist with the purpose to identify variables that are influencing your life day to day - Self experimentation

- [ ] wakeup time
- [ ] time :sunny: ?
- [ ] time exercises? 
- [ ] aerobic
- [ ] anaerobic 
- [ ] chill? 
- [ ] hot? 
- [ ] non sleep/deep rest protocol/hypnosis
- [ ] meals? 

 
### Tools for Managing Stress & Anxiety

- what is stress? from neck to navel are the nerves responsable...
    - sympathetic nerve ganglia they fire for stress -> release acetilcoline -> post... -> epinefrine (adrenaline): the stress response push certain system to be activate and not for other system (the agitation -> the blood go only to certain part of your body that support moving)
    - control stress = control response -> best tools to reduce stress activate control are: para sympathetic nervous system:
        - exaling the diaphram moves up
        - inaling the diaphram moves down
        1. calm down quickly techniques = exale longer and more vigorous than inale
        2. phisiological side? 29' https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ntfcfJ28eiU&list=PLPNW_gerXa4Pc8S2qoUQc5e8Ir97RLuVW&index=4
